### Why I gave up on SRE and you may want to (02/26)

  This is a post that is hard to write because site engineering is genuinely exciting (to me). Having said that, I think SRE outside of Google is a shady way to sell the same old model.

  Many advocates of SRE and Devops would collectively push against this statement, but if you take the time to read all of their ideas (in their books), you will realize that Google's model is, well, only serving itself and that Devops and SRE are not a new set of roles, but a set of expectations that have as objective streamlining the delivery process of a product in order to make engineering teams more focused in their products and not their tools... Except quite the opposite happened by those who blindly adopted these ideas.

  I believe, for a start, that no Devops or Site reliability engineer should ever take that position if that person cannot: a) solve problems, b) code their solutions, c) manage a product from its very source and d) be critical of their own product flaws and needs. Most organizations have focused on providing a specific set of tools and skills and isolating them from the common engineering workflow, that idea is terribly flawed; it creates a breach between expectations and actions, not to mention allows people with poor understanding of a product to ironically produce it or operate it.

  I don't have a straight proposal here, though. I find that the old model of `Developer -> Administrator -> Operator` was not less flawed. I come to believe that the problem, as usual, is focus. Spending resources solving a problem that others have solved is as useful as taking a cargo cult approach. But I understand the reluctance of writing our own tools and processes, they cost engineering time and often are less sophisticated. So where do we go from here? I think we can do the next obvious thing, figure out what are our own design, infrastructure, and organization pitfalls before we build our product.

  Well, if you actually need to take on the challenge of transforming your organization, I would recommend two things: 1. Increase your engineering capacity, even if it's temporary, you need the resources if you are not willing to take a hit in your organization's throughput. 2. Expand your engineers' own skills. This is not a call for more full-stack nonsense, this is a call to understand **to the core** what exactly you are doing. There should be no division of responsibilities, it just does not make sense to have people writing code being disconnected from their own infrastructure's capabilities. I understand there are some reasonable exceptions, like a database administrator actually taking on the task of tuning a database, but from my perspective, there is no excuse for a developer to ignore the performance caveats of a query they wrote. Equally, it does not make sense to have so called engineers focused on writing templates and totally ignoring the business needs and the code (they support) nuances and inefficiencies.

  My reason to give up on SRE is not a sour one but one of using reason. SRE looks great on paper, even the pay is better than it deserves, but it is terribly unproductive and while it should just force engineering to apply its own principles to the rest of the operations, in reality it alienates the processes involved in producing software. I think the final straw to me was having to choose on focusing on the tools rather than the architecture principles. I think that degree of specialization is comparable to those that came before the industrial revolution, and I don't want to tend horses when cars start rolling down the street.

  I still love computers, just not in the way Google, or any other big tech entity is telling me to do.

---
<div align="center">
  <a href="../../indexes/2026.md" title="Back to year's index">📖</a>
</div>